(upbeat music)
Stephanie Rearick is an activist
who has taken up the gauntlet
for those who are marginalized
by society in any number of ways,
but for the last four years
her involvement has been in
the arena of timebanking.
Based loosely on barter systems of the past,
computer databases,
and communities based on
connection with one another
create opportunities for sharing your skills
in a very real and satisfying way.
My first activism was with Amnesty International
in college just getting my feet wet, basically,
and then I worked for Greenpeace for six years,
and then I, also, worked with
a local independent, political party
in Madison called Progressive Dane,
and chaired the Drug Policy Task Force
viewing drug policy and the War on Drugs
as one of the key issues
in social justice, especially,
playing into the racial disparity
in our prison system,
and our over-incarceration of people,
so those are some of the ways that
I ended up kind of indirectly coming into
working on timebanking and currency issues.
And all the while, you,
by the way, are a recording artist as well,
so you keep your music
to keep you sane and happy,
and keep your messages rolling.
What made you realize,
or what was the epiphany for you
that when it comes down to it,
everything keeps flowing back to
the economics of it all.
Well, first of all the things that I choose
to do with my life like doing music,
and doing music that doesn't necessarily
appeal to masses of people,
but does appeal to people
who like the music I do.
Doing music I run a small coffeehouse
that's also a music venue,
and then being politically active.
All of those things are things
that I think really have value.
People in the community say they have value,
and that they're very important,
but they're all very difficult
to make a living at.
I chose
to live with less money,
and less material goods,
in favor of doing what I want to do,
and I felt free to do that which is partly
because I grew up in a comfortable situation.
There are a lot of people
who wouldn't free to do that,
so there was that,
and then also all the issues
that I was working on,
all of these things have such a common thread
where our money system
is driving everything
the exact wrong direction.
If you own a small business
you're pressured to continue to expand.
Small businesses are constantly
eaten up by big businesses,
and then with music it's very difficult
for people to actually be able
to present their music,
have the resources to record,
and tour, and things like that.
Then with drug policy,
first of all elicit drug markets create
a huge economic incentive
for people to participate in
illicit drug markets.
Imprisoning people keeps them off
the unemployment rolls.
There's a huge economic driver
of the prison industrial complex.
Big incentive, yes,
especially since they've been privatized.
Oh, yes, absolutely.
All the different law enforcement.
Even the human service sector.
There's so much incentive
to be needed in order to continue
to draw the funding, and keep your job,
so I just realized the common thread
among all these things is the money system,
and decided to follow the money back
to what money is,
and why does the system work this way,
and why do we accept it?
Why do we allow ourselves to be
enslaved by this system that
we know has destroyed our communities,
is destroying our communities,
is destroying our planet,
is destroying our inner lives,
and destroying our passion,
you know, our ability to do things
that we're passionate about.
I think we just accept it
because it doesn't occur to us
that it could be any different,
so because of all those things
I started feeling like
we were about to race right off the cliff,
and then I picked up this book
"The Future of Money" by Bernard Lietaer,
and for the first time
I realized there were issues with money,
and I actually helped start
a local currency in Madison back in 1995
on the basic recognition that
we could use more money,
and use money that circulates locally.
I had a basic understanding of
the fact that interest on money
was part of the problem.
That's part of what widens the gap
between rich and poor,
and that's part of
the fundamental problem with money,
so I had that understanding,
and then working on Madison Hours
that was very eye-opening
for me to learn how little
I actually understood about
the Federal money system,
but until I picked up the Bernard Lietaer book
I didn't have a clear understanding
of all the different functions of money,
and the history of money,
and he also presents
a lot of different models
from different places,
and different times in history,
and that was the first time I really realized,
well, it doesn't have to be this way.
In fact, this is a recent experiment.
I would say, especially,
now that I'm in the timebank,
which we'll talk about more,
is structured as a non-profit organization,
so I'm constantly having to apply for money,
write proposals, say exactly how
I'm gonna spend the money,
then evaluation, and outcomes.
That's a full-time job.
Oh, I know, yeah, I mean,
that's a whole other realm to get into,
but now that I'm in the world
where we have to show outcomes,
and show successes
in order to keep being funded,
if I were running
the Central Bank Money Experiment,
debt-based money, interest-bearing money,
I would say that we could have
decided a long time ago
that experiment has failed.
Yes.
It's kind of absurd that we haven't
come to that conclusion yet
since this system that we all labor under
has built into it periodic collapses.
It seems like between 10 and 15 years
there is a collapse of some magnitude,
some are greater than others.
That's one of the things that I realized
is this is not set in stone.
It's not given by divine decree.
This is a system that has evolved
through some trial and error,
and it's had some great success.
I'm not knocking the idea entirely
of this debt-based,
interest-bearing money system.
It helps in certain realms.
I mean there's some things that
should be competed for on a big scale,
things that involve scarce resources
that need to be a large infrastructure,
but, anyhow,
but just realizing there are
lots of different models,
and they drive things in different directions.
They apply to different parts of the economy.
They accomplish different
functions in society.
It just really helped liberate my thinking,
and consciousness.
It actually gave me hope for the future,
I have to say,
for the first time since I was adult enough
to understand what was going on in the world.
It was the first time
I actually felt hopeful that we could have
a future at all, and a brighter future.
This was after your exposure to
"The Future of Money?"
Yes, yes.
So that really got you rolling.
It really did, yeah, it really did.
It changed my life, definitely.
Now you mentioned
something about timebanking.
Now there may be a part of your story
between where you are right now,
and the timebanking.
If there is, fill us in,
and then I want to go into this timebanking
because I'm very fascinated by it.
So you mean how I arrived at timebanking
as what I wanted to do.
So when I read "The Future of Money"
he described mutual credit systems,
so, essentially, that is
when people want to conduct a transaction
one person gives a credit to the other person,
and that person then has a credit
they can use with anybody else
whose participating in the network,
or in the economy.
When I read about that
it was kind of a head slap, like,
"Why haven't we been doing this all along?"
It was very simple and elegant,
and perfect, it just made perfect sense.
Then the timebanking part of it
simplifies it even further
because the unit of exchange is an hour.
It's universal.
Everyone's hour is valued the same.
There's no negotiability.
You don't say my hour is worth $20.
Your hour is worth an hour,
is worth a time dollar,
and everyone exchanges equally.
So a lawyer can't say,
an attorney can't say,
"My $225 an hour
"is really worth a lot more than
"your breadmaking hour."
Yes, exactly, no one can do that.
I just realized that that has a capacity
to tap all kinds of untapped potential,
and all kinds of people,
and to just really include people,
and to give people a chance to participate
in something that they don't have to
really stretch to wrap their brain around.
People get the idea of timebanking.
It's intuitive to people.
It goes back to how we
naturally interact as human beings.
It takes us back to how
in the past and a lot of people in the present
work collectively to help each other
in the community,
but it also applies newer technologies,
and thoughts about how you can catalog
the assets, and the needs in a community
just increases using web-based technology,
or other types of technologies.
You can just really increase
the pool of knowledge of what is available
in your community,
so people can get what they need.
For example, running the coffeehouse
that I run I have had the opportunity
to do trade and barter with people forever,
but then I realized I'm fortunate.
I have a visible commodity
that I have to trade,
and everybody has something
they can exchange.
That should be available to everybody,
so then with information technologies
timebanking can make all that available,
and it doesn't have to be
a marketable skill.
It can be visiting people that are homebound.
It can be making phone calls
to check in on people,
or invite people to events,
or sharing your music collection,
or you can be fixing a computer,
or providing legal services,
or providing health care, or literacy training.
So it taps all kinds of assets from
the largest to the smallest,
and the smallest I don't mean small,
but I mean least marketable.
Those are some of the most important things
that happen in society.
Such as home visits.
Such as checking in on people.
Such as helping a person who's disabled
get out to do something fun.
Yeah, caring, caregiving.
Civic engagement is a huge one.
This is something I noticed from
being involved in local government issues.
I also used to serve on some city committees.
At that point I realized
while a lot of our city governance
is done through volunteer labor,
but who's at the table at those things?
I think volunteering
it's a beautiful thing.
It's a wonderful thing,
and I don't mean to diminish it,
but some people grow up with
the expectation that they'll volunteer
in their leisure the leisure time to volunteer,
and other people don't.
When you're looking at civic engagement,
for example, and city committee work,
and making decisions that are central
to the health of the city
you don't tend to have the people,
you know, you don't tend to have
the people who are lower income,
and the people of color.
The people who are working
three jobs to meet ends meet
because they simply can't do it,
or even if they're available to do it
they don't feel empowered to do it.
It doesn't occur to people to do it,
so with timebanking
and with having everybody
catalog their assets,
and say what they can do,
and when they're available
it gives everyone an opportunity
to give what they have,
to give what they can,
and that's one of
the huge powers of timebanking,
and that's one of the things
that has been very eye-opening to me
is just to get to know so many people
who felt so discounted their whole lives,
and then they get an opportunity
to focus on what they're good at,
and share it with other people, and it opens a...
Yeah, it might be a housewife.
Yeah, she might be able to make
incredible pies, or something.
There's a place in society for a good pie.
I need to tell you.
This is one of my favorite stories.
From the very beginning of the timebank
we had an information meeting at the library,
and we brought together,
I think, there were probably 20 people there,
and then people just talked about what
they would offer, and what they would need,
and a guy said he would really like
to have someone bake him a pie once a week
and then just a couple of weeks later
a woman joined,
and I mentioned it to her, and she's like,
"I love pie.
"I want to make a pie,
"and take out a slice for me and my partner."
So they started an arrangement,
so she would bake a pie every week,
and take two slices, and give him the rest,
and he would pay time dollars for it.
So those kinds of things.
You would never have that happen, otherwise.
You know what I mean.
It creates a forum for all this
kind of exchange.
It's beautiful.
It builds relationships, it builds community.
People get to know each other
who would never get to know each other.
You're only matched up
based on you offer this,
and the other person requests this.
Another really great early story
was a woman Janet.
She's one of our very first members,
and she's still really active,
and she's absolutely wonderful.
She's about 70, and she had been in
a really tough circumstance
before she joined the timebank.
She wanted to learn to crochet,
and a 15-year-old boy
taught her to crochet,
which is really sweet.
Oh, how cute.
It's funny because I ended up putting
the anecdote in our brochure,
and then someone who was
proofreading the brochure said,
"Oh yeah, you got this wrong.
"You said, he taught her to crochet."
I thought that was funny that the assumption
was just like, of course, that's not.
Right, so this 15-year-old boy
his dollars were in
educating her to crochet.
What were her dollars?
The outputted goods?
Her crocheted goods, or?
No, she has earned time dollars
by helping with child care at events.
That's one of the things she likes to do.
She likes to read to kids.
She helps out on one of the governing bodies
because we ask our members to participate
in running the timebank
in their neighborhoods,
and they earn time dollars for doing that.
That's part of the civic engagement,
and capacity building that
timebanking is really good for.
Giving people all this experience of doing
what they want to see happen in their community.
So those are some of the ways
that she's earned,
and then she continues to spend
having someone help her clean.
So you have to really identify
not only your own skills,
and like you say can be a variety of skills
that you can put in.
I mean we're usually,
most human beings are capable of
quite a number of things,
so we put those skills into the timebank,
but then you also look at what
the community needs are as well,
so you kind of have to kind of
match community needs,
and there can be more of a saturation
of a certain kind of need
within a community, for example.
Yes.
Okay, so that works,
and this even works in larger systems.
You have what are called co-productions
with this timebank,
and I just love this concept.
Can you give us a couple examples
of these co-productions.
Yes, so co-production is a philosophy
that says we all are diminished when we
divide society into classes of givers,
and classes of receivers,
and as I had just mentioned
being involved in this
I see how diminishing it is
to people who feel like
they're just defined by their needs,
so co-production says that we work together
to create the systems that we need,
or the situation that we need,
and that we're all better off for that.
You're gonna end up with
a stronger system overall
because if the people who need to use
the system are part of designing it
you're gonna be less likely to
leave out key components, for example,
and it's a way to build
partnership in our society, and equality,
and those are some really important
values in timebanking.
I have many examples of co-production,
but one of the examples is
the timebank youth court,
and what that is
is kids between the ages of 12 and 17
who are getting into trouble.
Generally, they're getting
a municipal ordinance violation
for us in Madison.
Which is what would be?
Just a ticket.
Most of them are for fights,
disorderly conduct.
Can be for drug possession.
It can be sometimes
for underage drinking, truancy,
let's see, retail thefts.
Kind of normal types of.
Normal teen stuff.
Yeah, teenage mischief stuff.
Vandalism.
So instead of getting a ticket
they get referred to
the timebank youth court,
and they come before a jury of their peers
who've been recruited from the community,
or they go to the same school.
It depends on where it's based.
Do they get timebank units for that?
The jurors earn time dollars for that.
The jurors use their time dollars
for all kinds of things,
but a number of them have gotten computers.
We bring in donated computers,
and make them available.
We had a juror who got a garden plot,
and had a member teach her how to garden.
The jurors learn about restorative justice,
and what happens is
the jurors will ask questions
of the respondent which is
the kid who's gotten in trouble,
and their parent we encourage to participate.
They don't have to,
but we encourage them to participate.
So they ask questions based on
what happened in the incident,
what's going on in their life,
what they're doing well and at school,
what they're struggling with,
how things are going in the neighborhood.
So they try to get a sense
of what's going wrong
that's getting the kid into trouble,
but they also try to get a sense of
their strengths and interests,
and then they design a sentence
that ideally is based on both.
So frequently kids will get sentenced
to take a non-violent conflict resolution class.
That's a very common one
for the kids who are getting into fights,
or sometimes they'll get
an alcohol, another drug abuse mentor,
someone who can help them
deal with whatever issues they're dealing with,
but also they'll sentence them
to do something that's based on
what they like to do.
Our goal is to get
as many kids as possible
interested enough in whatever it is
they're doing that they want to stick with it.
So, any examples of that?
Yeah, well, actually, some of the kids
get sentenced to jury duty,
and I think that's one of the most
valuable sentences
when talking about co-production.
The respondents who get
sentenced to jury duty
have such great insights into
what's motivating kids to get in trouble,
and they make some of the best jurors.
A lot of the kids it seems like,
probably, most of the kids who stay active
will do jury duty,
and some of the kids have been on the jury
when they haven't been sentenced to do it.
They just choose to do it.
They don't earn anything
during their sentence,
but once their sentence is done,
or if they do something
on top of their sentence,
then they can get time dollars,
but we have had some families.
We have a couple of really great mentors
who some of the kids will get
sentenced to mentoring sessions,
and we had a family,
where the family joined the timebank,
they wanted the rest of the kids
to be able to access that mentor.
Actually, we've had a few like that
where they'll join the timebank
to continue taking a class,
or just have access to more resources,
so that's part of our goal
is to create a situation where kids
can be in an ongoing basis.
The other ways we use time dollars,
the other way that's integrated
into the youth court
is people who help staff.
The timebank youth court
will earn time dollars for that,
and then we also have a number of
community members who will
serve as mentors or advocates for the kids,
and earn time dollars for those things.
Do you have
law enforcement involved?
Yes, and that's actually how we started.
We have a wonderful police officer
who just really embraced the concept
right off the bat,
and started helping develop it.
Now our police chief just was signaling us out
for praise at a racial disparity conference
the other day,
and it makes so much sense
because we all know from common sense,
and from all the research
that kids are more likely to get in trouble
if they don't have recreational opportunities,
and economic opportunities,
and a lot of connections in their community,
so building that in, fundamentally,
to the youth court,
building those connections,
and building those opportunities
that's the point.
I'm, frankly, not interested in just creating
another system to get kids into trouble
in a less trouble oriented way.
I want to create a system
that really gives kids what they need,
and rebuilds the community around them
to support them,
and support good behavior,
and they're getting to know the other jurors,
and kids in their neighborhood,
and they have people looking out
for their success,
so that's the point.
We're small and we're new,
so I don't want to overstate
the case of our success,
but we're also based on the motto
that's been used in Washington, DC
since the year 2000, I think, or 2001.
They've been seeing
about 1,000 kids a year
have been going through
the DC youth court.
It's a great model,
and it's an example of how we use
timebanking as a tool for co-production
to tackle a problem in our community,
and the problem in our community
is racial disparities in the prison system,
and the school-to-prison pipeline,
so we are attempting to
disrupt that cycle for good.
Yes, wonderful.
So another one is
there's a beautiful
prisoner re-entry program
that our former board chair,
Cheri Maples has started
with her Buddha Sangha,
and she's now a dharma teacher.
She actually was one of
the candidates for police chief.
She has a long background
in the police department.
She was a captain for more than 20 years.
Now she's retired from that,
and runs a consulting mindfulness,
and social justice firm which is great,
but with her Sangha
has started this coming home project
for people coming out of prison,
and what they are doing is
forming a circle of support around
the person coming out of prison,
and connecting
the returnee with other resources
in the community,
so they can develop some references,
and some trust.
This is a big issue
because a lot of times
once that record is there they're unemployable.
Exactly.
Then it just leads them
right back to the same scenarios.
Exactly, so that's what
we're trying to do is
first of all perform the social support networks,
and the social contacts,
which is probably number one in each of
these things is the number of
social contacts that you have.
Then give people access
to all the resources they need
whether it's rides to job interviews,
or literacy help,
gardening help, help finding housing,
then also give them a chance
to tap into what their strengths and assets are
to develop the work references,
and develop skills if they have skills
that they need to develop,
and some other things that
they're doing around that.
Then they're gonna be teaching
meditation and mindfulness in the prisons,
and non-violent communication
in the prisons,
and then they've linked up with
the humane society,
who recently seized hundreds
of dogs from a puppy mill,
and some of the dogs were
very, very unsocialized.
The humane society,
they did this before
the timebank was part of it,
but the human society placed some of
these dogs with prisoners,
and taught the prisoners
how to socialize the dogs,
and the prisoners built a facility,
so now we put the timebank in there,
so they're gonna get time dollars
for what they're doing,
and then the humane society can use
time dollars for things that they need,
and they'll accept time dollars
for some of their summer camp stuff
that they do for kids.
This is wonderful.
These are all things that people
could be collaborating on anyhow,
without the timebank,
but the timebank is there to facilitate it.
Again, you catalog the assets,
and you catalog the needs
just by having people join and say
what they offer and what they need,
so the timebank is kind of more like
the information referral system.
It gives you the means of exchange
because you can exchange the credits,
but more than that it just shows you
where there are gaps,
and where you can plug in,
and help fill those.
We often say
matching unmet needs
with unused resources.
So you're tapping all this capacity,
and building capacity,
working cooperatively to do it.
It just makes a lot of sense.
It makes a lot of sense.
Well, how is it going in Madison?
It's going really well.
How many members do you have?
How long has it been going?
Yesterday was our fourth birthday,
October 20th.
Congratulations.
Thank you, and as of yesterday
we had 1,401 members,
and people had exchanged about
36,000 hours of service,
and that's just what's recorded
because people do make exchanges,
and choose not to record them which is fine.
Sometimes people make an exchange,
and it feels like it benefits both of them,
and they don't want to record anything,
or people don't get around to it,
which all that's fine
because our goal is what's happening
in human society,
it's not about the system itself.
It's about the effect that
it has on people and society.
At four years, 1,400 members
we're one of the faster growing timebanks.
I think part of that is
because when we initially started
we set out to accomplish several of
the things that we've seen
timebanking do in other places,
so we attempted to really get
a broad variety of skills and interests,
and people represented in the timebank,
so people who would
more naturally form an economy.
You can't just have one set of
assets available in an economy,
and have it flow,
so for us the sectors that
we attempted to connect
are non-profit human service organizations
has been huge, and community centers,
and individuals, and neighborhoods,
and then local food production,
local business to an extent,
and that's something that
we expect to build up more in the future,
juvenile and criminal justice.
How do you go further into
the goods and services aspect of it,
and involving businesses where it may not be
a literal unit of time
of one hour,
but say you have a local movie theater.
Let's do this, let's say
the economy is more severely damaged,
and there's just very little money
floating around out there
in your community, or any community,
and maybe you have a movie theater
owner who's still in business.
How do you start folding in
this kind of scenario?
You've had the ability
to be able to start building this
before some of the really
dire economic consequences have hit.
Once that happens
how does this work from there?
Well, I'll start with
how it would work in a business situation,
and then probably expand from there.
Right now,
and probably forever,
timebanking is really not designed
to go right into a business.
You're not gonna take it
in your cash register, generally,
and there are many reasons for that.
One is that it doesn't have
a monetary equivalent, and it can't.
Another is it has not been recognized
as taxable by the IRS,
and we want to keep it that way
for a number of reasons,
so we are protective of that,
but the way it can work now in a business
is your excess capacity
you make available for time dollars,
and then time dollars
you can use for things that you wouldn't
be able to get otherwise.
When we have businesses join our timebank
they sign off that they wouldn't
replace any paid labor with time dollars.
An example that I give is
if you have a hair salon you could say,
"I'll give one or two haircuts a week,
"or one or two haircuts a month for time dollars."
You charge time dollars based on
the amount of time you spend
cutting the hair,
and then you could use those time dollars
to have someone come,
and do child care for
a certain chunk of time
which might get you some customers
you wouldn't be able to get otherwise,
or you could use those time dollars
to get help with marketing,
or graphic design,
or things that you're having
a hard time affording with money,
so that's how it can work in
a business context,
and does work in a business context now.
And that's still, though,
your effort for effort.
Yes.
What happens if you're
spilling over into goods
because there's a shortage of money?
We do deal with goods somewhat.
Mostly food, which is great,
so people just value it
based on what feels fair,
so right now we have a farmer
whose participating in
the Director of Family Farm Defenders
makes Fair Trade cheese available
for time dollars.
We have people selling eggs from
their chickens that they keep,
and selling extra produce
from their gardens for time dollars,
and people just do it based on
what feels fair for an hour of someone's labor.
It's just negotiable between the two people.
With that I'm gonna mention
a project that we're just starting here
which is what I'm hoping to do,
and working toward,
it's not just hoping.
What we're working toward
is at least exploring
the possibility of creating one system
that would be a timebank and LETS,
which is the Local Exchange Trading System.
LETS operates,
and just because this is a separate interview
I know that you've talked
with other people about that.
They're both mutual credit systems
where you exchange.
I give you a credit for whatever
service or good I'm getting from you.
LETS system is price-based,
and market-based,
so a LETS system
you can do a business transaction,
so you can come to my business,
and pay for coffee and cookies with
a LETS credit that has a monetary equivalence,
and then I can take that LETS credit,
and use it for getting supplies,
and that's all taxable,
and it's all negotiable.
What I would like to do is have a combination,
so all the information about
offers or requests, assets and needs
is in one database,
and then depending on the type of transaction
it either operates under timebank rules,
or LETS rules,
and you can exchange it.
You can shift it into the different rules
depending on what you're doing,
and if that happens
then we would also be advocating for policy
to support that for overt tax policies
that protect the timebank part,
and enable goods to be traded
in the timebank,
that what I think should be in timebank rules
is all of the core economy
which is civic engagement, caregiving,
community building,
community organizing, creativity,
and also the basic necessities of life
because that is something
that can be accessible to everybody.
In timebanks people often,
not always, but people often have the ability
to have a greater negative balance
in their account,
so that if you aren't very healthy,
and you need a lot of help,
and you need more help than what
you're gonna be able to provide, that's fine.
That's how we operate in our timebank.
People are happy to support people
who need help,
and that's what happens in our society.
People sometimes freak out
at the idea of someone having
a big negative balance.
Well, in our society we do subsidize
the people who aren't able to make it,
only we do it under duress.
In the market economy
people are also complaining about
we tax a market economy to pay people
to go work with people
because they don't have money,
and they don't have access to the market economy.
It's a little bit crazy,
so in this realm
all that stuff would be protected,
everyone's included.
Then in the LETS system
credit worthiness becomes a bigger concern,
and credit limits, and debit limits
become a bigger concern
because you are doing
a market-based situation over there.
It's competitive.
I view it as cooperative and community,
versus competitive in marketplace.
There's nothing wrong with competition,
and you need to have competition
when you're dealing with scarce resources,
but you should not have to compete
with people to meet
the basic necessities of life,
or to live a full life as a human being.
There's no reason to compete
with your neighbors to get piano lessons,
so all those kind of things.
So that's what we actually are
working toward, hopefully,
is at least exploring the possibility of doing that,
and it doesn't seem like it needs
to be too difficult,
and then we're planning to distill it,
and to make it work at lots of
different levels of technology,
so you could access this system
via mobile phone
if that's what people
are using in your community.
If you don't have electricity, or Internet access
you can do it in a paper ledger,
and maybe once a month
reconcile it with the database,
or maybe not even do that,
so we're interested in creating a kit with tools
for people to be able to do this locally
in any kind of setting,
so it would have the system itself.
It would also have training tools,
and tools to create local training,
and outreach materials.
It would also have different types of projects
that you could get as part of your kit.
For example, starting a garden,
or starting a youth court,
or doing weatherization.
There are a whole lot of different options
that we're exploring right now,
but a kit so people could learn
how to do it by doing it,
and create a project together
right from the beginning
develop some community around that.
We were talking about it,
so then even if the system fails
you haven't failed, you've succeeded,
you've created something
that's new in your community,
so that's what we're really working on now
is really figuring out how we can
scale this up as quickly as possible,
and make it available to the people
who really, really need it.
The people who are engaged
in the conversations about money,
and monetary reform
tend to be the people who need it
not necessarily the least.
I understand what you're saying, yes.
The people who live in abject poverty
who are already excluded
from the money system,
they don't need to talk about it.
They know it's wrong,
and they know that
this relationship is strained,
this relationship with money,
so really what we need to do
is demonstrate how
we can do things differently,
and demonstrate that it can be right,
and give people an opportunity
to participate in that,
and people do participate.
People are very excited to get a chance
to do something that works,
and that feels goods,
and that we're participating as equals,
and we're co-operating,
and that's fundamental to it.
So true, that's kind of it.
That's a summary right there.
Any other final thoughts you have
other than what we've already covered?
Yeah, there are a couple.
I did want to mention one other
co-production example which is
we have a timebank store in Madison,
and it's in a neighborhood
that's very low income,
and has had a bad reputation,
although, they've been doing tons of stuff
to turn their neighborhood around,
but we started there with
a timebank store
because it seemed like a good way
to get people involved,
and also fill a need
because people have a hard time
obtaining some of the things that they need,
so we went to St. Louis with
a number of people from the neighborhood,
and the public health nurse
who works in the neighborhood.
We went to St. Louis,
and visited the timebank stores there
which was a big relief
because they're very small scale,
and seeing them made us realize
this won't be so hard after all.
And then the city donated space to us.
They donated a three-bedroom
apartment for free,
and then we collected a lot of donated goods,
and started a timebank store.
People in the neighborhood staff it.
They earn time dollars for staffing it,
and then people earn their time dollars
by helping the neighborhood association
put on community meals.
They help the Allied Wellness Center
do their events.
They help Joining Forces for Families,
is another organization there,
and they earn time dollars that way,
or they go and help with childcare,
or cleaning for other neighbors.
Then they can come in,
and get goods from the store.
It was really cool when we priced the goods
because I thought that was gonna be difficult,
but what we do is just brought
a bunch of really active
timebank members in,
and it was just really easy for people
to look at it and see what felt fair,
so, for example, you can generally
get four items of clothing
for a time dollar which is worth an hour,
or you can get four toiletries
for a time dollar.
You can get a set of dishes
for a time dollar,
and then we have computers,
and TVs, and books, and toys,
and diapers, and cleaning supplies
are really in demand,
and so that's a good way.
For me that's a good example of how
you can pull a neighborhood together
to figure out a need and fill it,
and it's been a lot of fun
to work with people,
and there's a real sense of ownership of it.
That's one thing that
I love about timebanking
is it does bring in a lot of different people.
We have a lot of people with
developmental disabilities in our timebank.
That's actually one of our sources,
main source of funding right now
is the County Department of Human Services
Developmental Disabilities Budget.
They give us money
because they see the timebank
as being really valuable resources
for people with disabilities
who are on the waiting list to receive services,
or people who are
already receiving services,
and everything is being cut.
You know what they always cut first
which is understandable,
although, very sad,
is the things that make life worth living,
so you have staff whose
totally stretched thin.
They're not taking people out to the movies,
they're not playing, you know, they're not...
All those amenities are gone.
They're relying on their staff for everything,
so this way not only can they have,
or a lot of other people are drawn
to go do fun things with,
but they're building a lot of relationships
with people that aren't just their staff.
We have one guy with
a developmental disability who
he pays time dollars to have people
come play cribbage with him,
and then he earns time dollars
teaching people to play cribbage, it's perfect.
How wonderful, that's perfect.
Yeah, so it's just a way to
really include everybody,
and really include all the activities
that happen in our economy.
People think of our economy
as just the marketplace,
but the economy is much bigger than that,
and the core economy is
a lot of what timebank focuses on
which is caregiving, civic engagement,
community building,
community organizing, creativity.
Another thing I like to tell people
when they're joining the timebank is
we want to help you do more of what you like,
and less of what you don't like
because we don't always do that.
Spending eight hours, 12 hours,
in some cases 16 hours a day
just to keep enough cash
rolling in to survive.
That is not a civilized way of living.
Not at all, and especially when you look at
the history of the whole situation.
Automation was sold to people
based on the idea
that everyone would have more leisure time,
and it continues to go
the opposite direction.
Absolutely,
I mean that's what I think of.
I think it's really important to realize
what money is.
It's a tool, it's an agreement
for people to be able
to make exchanges with one another,
and then when you think about that,
and look at where we are,
and how if this amount of human experience,
and information, and technology
that we are a slave to our money system
at the expense of our planet,
expense of our communities, it's outrageous.
Our relationships with
our own families.
Right.
Right, it is outrageous.
It has to stop.
It has to stop, it has to stop.
It's gonna stop.
I think so.
I have a friend who made this great quote.
He said, "The good news is
"we'd all be better off with less.
"The bad news is
"we're all gonna be better off."
Yes.
On that, thank you so much for your time,
and for sharing this information,
and your participation in this.
I think this is going to be
greatly inspirational to a lot of people
to start taking this up
in their own communities.
Thanks Stephanie.
You can go to TimeBanks.org
to see how timebanking
might work in your community.
Outside the U.S. there are also
a number of timebanking resources.
Just do a Google search for your region.
We'll continue our research
into alternative economic systems next month.
Until next time,
thanks for watching CMN.